Add New PPL Commands (#11606)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _search-plugins/sql/ppl/functions.md

# Commands

<details markdown="block">
  <summary>
    Table of contents
  </summary>
  {: .text-delta }
- TOC
{:toc}
</details>

{::options toc_levels="2..2" /}

PPL supports most common [SQL functions]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/sql/functions/), including [relevance search]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/sql/full-text/), but also introduces several more functions (called _commands_), which are available in PPL only.

---

## ad

<details open markdown="block">
  <summary>
    Syntax and examples
  </summary>
  {: .text-delta }

> The `ad` command applies the Random Cut Forest (RCF) algorithm in the [ML Commons plugin]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ml-commons-plugin/index/) on the search result returned by a PPL command. Based on the input, the plugin uses two types of RCF algorithms: fixed in time RCF for processing time-series data and batch RCF for processing non-time-series data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `ad` command applies the Random Cut Forest (RCF) algorithm in the [ML Commons plugin]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/ml-commons-plugin/index/) on the search result returned by a PPL command. Based on the input, the plugin uses two types of RCF algorithms: fixed-in-time RCF for processing time-series data and batch RCF for processing non-time-series data.
```

```sql
search source = state_country as a
| where country = 'USA' OR country = 'England'
| left join on a.name = b.name [
    source = occupation
    | where salary > 0
    | fields name, country, salary
    | sort salary
    | head 3
  ] as b
| stats avg(salary) by span(age, 10) as age_span, b.country
```
{% include copy.html %}

The command returns the following results.

avg(salary) | age_span | b.country
:--- | :--- | :---
null | 40 | null
70000.0 | 30 | USA
100000.0 | 70 | England

### Limitations

The `join` command works only when `plugins.calcite.enabled` is set to `true`.

</details>

---

## kmeans

<details open markdown="block">
  <summary>
    Syntax and examples
  </summary>
  {: .text-delta }
  
The `kmeans` command applies the ML Commons plugin's k-means algorithm to the provided PPL command's search results.

### Syntax

```sql
kmeans <cluster-number>
```
{% include copy.html %}

The following table describes the parameters for the `kmeans` command.

Field | Description | Required
:--- | :--- | :---
`cluster-number` | The number of clusters you want to group your data points into. | Yes

**Example: Group Iris data**

> This example shows how to classify three Iris species (Iris setosa, Iris virginica and Iris versicolor) based on the combination of four features measured from each sample: the length and the width of the sepals and petals:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example shows how to classify three Iris species (Iris setosa, Iris virginica, and Iris versicolor) based on the combination of four features measured from each sample: the length and the width of the sepals and petals:
```

| 1001 | Hello | Artist | USA | 70000
| 1002 | John | Doctor | Canada | 120000
| 1003 | David | Doctor | N/A | 120000
| 1004 | David | N/A | Canada | 0
| 1005 | Jane | Scientist | Canada | 90000

The `work_information` index contains the following data.

| UID | Name  | Department | Occupation
:--- | :--- | :--- | :---
| 1000 | Jake  | IT | Engineer |
| 1002 | John  | DATA | Scientist |
| 1003 | David | HR | Doctor |
| 1005 | Jane  | DATA | Engineer |
| 1006 | Tom   | SALES | Artist |

**Example 1: Look up workers and return the corresponding department**

The following example looks up workers and returns the corresponding department:

```sql
source = workers | lookup work_information uid as id append department
```
{% include copy.html %}

The command returns the following results.

| id | name | occupation | country | salary | department
:--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :---
1000 | Jake | Engineer | England | 100000 | IT
1001 | Hello | Artist | USA | 70000 | Null
1002 | John | Doctor | Canada | 120000 | DATA
1003 | David | Doctor | Null | 120000 | HR
1004 | David | Null | Canada | 0 | Null
1005 | Jane | Scientist | Canada | 90000 | DATA

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

1001 | Hello | Artist | USA | 70000 | null
1002 | John | Doctor | Canada | 120000 | Scientist
1003 | David | Doctor | null | 120000 | Doctor
1004 | David | null | Canada | 0 | Doctor
1005 | Jane | Scientist | Canada | 90000 | Engineer

### Limitations

The `lookup` command works only when `plugins.calcite.enabled` is set to `true`.

</details>

---

## parse

<details open markdown="block">
  <summary>
    Syntax and examples
  </summary>
  {: .text-delta }
  
Use the `parse` command to parse a text field using a regular expression and append the result to the search result.
 

### Syntax

```sql
parse <field> <regular-expression>
```
{% include copy.html %}

The following table describes the parameters for the `parse` command.

Field | Description | Required
:--- | :--- | :---
`field` | A text field. | Yes
`regular-expression` | The regular expression used to extract new fields from the given text field. If a new field name exists, it replaces the original field. | Yes

The regular expression is used to match the whole text field of each document with Java regex engine. Each named capture group in the expression becomes a new `STRING` field.

**Example 1: Create new field**

> The example shows how to create new field `host` for each document. `host` is the hostname after `@` in `email` field. Parsing a null field returns an empty string.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example shows how to create a new field `host` for each document. `host` is the hostname after `@` in the `email` field. Parsing a null field returns an empty string:
```

```sql
source=accounts | parse email '.+@(?<host>.+)' | fields email, host ;
```
{% include copy.html %}

The command returns the following results.

| email | host  
:--- | :--- |
| amberduke@pyrami.com  | pyrami.com 
| hattiebond@netagy.com | netagy.com 
| null                  | null          
| daleadams@boink.com   | boink.com  

**Example 2: Override the existing field**

> The example shows how to override the existing address field with street number removed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example shows how to override the existing address field with the street number removed:
```

```sql
source=accounts | parse address '\d+ (?<address>.+)' | fields address ;
```
{% include copy.html %}

The command returns the following results.

| address
:--- |
| Holmes Lane      
| Bristol Street   
| Madison Street   
| Hutchinson Court

> **Example 3: Filter and sort by cast parsed field**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Example 3: Filter and sort by a cast-parsed field**
```

```sql
search source=accounts | rare gender;
```
{% include copy.html %}

The command returns the following results.

| gender
:--- |
| F
| M

**Example 2: Find the least common values grouped by gender**

To find the least common age grouped by gender, use the following command:

```sql
search source=accounts | rare age by gender;
```
{% include copy.html %}

The command returns the following results.

| gender | age
:--- | :--- |
| F  | 28
| M  | 32
| M  | 33

### Limitations

The `rare` command is not rewritten to OpenSearch DSL, it is only executed on the coordinating node.

</details>

---

## regex

<details open markdown="block">
  <summary>
    Syntax and examples
  </summary>
  {: .text-delta }
  
The `regex` command filters search results by matching field values against a regular expression pattern. Only documents where the specified field matches the pattern are included in the results.

### Syntax

```sql
regex <field> = <pattern>
regex <field> != <pattern>
```
{% include copy.html %}

The following table describes the parameters for the `regex` command.

Field | Description | Required
:--- | :--- | :---
`field` | The field name to match against. | Yes

> `pattern` | The regular expression pattern to match. Supports Java regex syntax including named groups, lookahead/lookbehind, and character classes. | Yes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`pattern` | The regular expression pattern to match. Supports Java regex syntax, including named groups, lookahead/lookbehind, and character classes. | Yes
```

```sql
source=accounts | regex lastname="^[A-Z][a-z]+$" | fields account_number, firstname, lastname;
```
{% include copy.html %}

The command returns the following results.

| account_number | firstname | lastname
:--- | :--- | :--- |
| 1  | Amber   | Duke
| 6  | Hattie  | Bond
| 13 | Nanette | Bates
| 18 | Dale    | Adams

**Example 2: Negative matching**

This example shows how to exclude documents where the ``lastname`` field ends with "son".

```sql
source=accounts | regex lastname!=".*son$" | fields account_number, lastname;
```
{% include copy.html %}

The command returns the following results.

| account_number | lastname
:--- | :--- |
| 1  | Duke
| 6  | Bond
| 13 | Bates
| 18 | Adams

**Example 3: Email domain matching**

This example shows how to filter documents by email domain patterns.

```sql
source=accounts | regex email="@pyrami\.com$" | fields account_number, email;
```
{% include copy.html %}

The command returns the following results.

| account_number | email
:--- | :--- |
| 1  | amberduke@pyrami.com

**Example 4: Complex patterns with character classes**

> This example shows how to use complex regex patterns with character classes and quantifiers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example shows how to use complex regex patterns with character classes and quantifiers:
```

```sql
source=accounts | regex address="\d{3,4}\s+[A-Z][a-z]+\s+(Street|Lane|Court)" | fields account_number, address;
```
{% include copy.html %}

The command returns the following results.

| account_number | address
:--- | :--- |
| 1  | 880 Holmes Lane
| 6  | 671 Bristol Street
| 13 | 789 Madison Street
| 18 | 467 Hutchinson Court

**Example 5: Case-sensitive matching**

> This example demonstrates that regex matching is case-sensitive by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example demonstrates that regex matching is case-sensitive by default:
```

### Limitations

> The `rename` command is not rewritten to OpenSearch DSL, it is only executed on the coordinating node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `rename` command is not rewritten to OpenSearch query DSL; it is only executed on the coordinating node.
```

</details>

---

## rex

<details open markdown="block">
  <summary>
    Syntax and examples
  </summary>
  {: .text-delta }
  
The `rex` command extracts fields from a raw text field using regular expression named capture groups.

### Syntax

```sql
rex [mode=<mode>] field=<field> <pattern> [max_match=<int>] [offset_field=<string>]
```
{% include copy.html %}

The following table describes the parameters for the `rex` command.

Field | Description | Required | Default
:--- | :--- | :--- | :---
`field` | The field must be a string field to extract data from. | Yes | N/A

> `pattern` | The regular expression pattern with named capture groups used to extract new fields. Pattern must contain at least one named capture group using ``(?<name>pattern)`` syntax. | Yes | N/A

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`pattern` | The regular expression pattern with named capture groups used to extract new fields. The pattern must contain at least one named capture group using ``(?<name>pattern)`` syntax. | Yes | N/A
```

> `mode` | Either `extract` which creates new fields from regular expression named capture groups or `sed` which performs text substitution on the field using sed-style patterns. | No | `extract`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`mode` | Either `extract`, which creates new fields from regular expression named capture groups, or `sed`, which performs text substitution on the field using sed-style patterns. | No | `extract`
```

`max_match` | Maximum number of matches to extract. If greater than 1, extracted fields become arrays. The value 0 means unlimited matches, but is automatically capped to the configured limit (default: 10, configurable via `plugins.ppl.rex.max_match.limit`). | No | 1
`offset_field` | Field name to store the character offset positions of matches. Only available in extract mode. | No | N/A

**Example 1: Basic Field Extraction**

This example shows extracting username and domain from email addresses using named capture groups. Both extracted fields are returned as string type.

```sql
source=accounts | rex field=email "(?<username>[^@]+)@(?<domain>[^.]+)" | fields email, username, domain | head 2;
```
{% include copy.html %}

The command returns the following results.

| email | username | domain
:--- | :--- | :--- |
| amberduke@pyrami.com  | amberduke  | pyrami
| hattiebond@netagy.com | hattiebond | netagy

**Example 2: Handling Non-matching Patterns**

> This example shows the rex command returning all events, setting extracted fields to null for non-matching patterns. Extracted fields are string type when matches are found.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example shows the `rex` command returning all events, setting extracted fields to null for non-matching patterns. Extracted fields are of a string type when matches are found:
```

```sql
source=accounts | rex field=email "(?<user>[^@]+)@(?<domain>gmail\\.com)" | fields email, user, domain | head 2;
```
{% include copy.html %}

The command returns the following results.

| email | user | domain
:--- | :--- | :--- |
| amberduke@pyrami.com  | null | null
| hattiebond@netagy.com | null | null

**Example 3: Multiple Matches with max_match**

> This example shows extracting multiple words from address field using max_match parameter. The extracted field is returned as an array type containing string elements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example shows how to extract multiple words from the address field using the `max_match` parameter. The extracted field is returned as an array type containing string elements:
```

```sql
source=accounts | rex field=address "(?<words>[A-Za-z]+)" max_match=2 | fields address, words | head 3;
```
{% include copy.html %}

The command returns the following results.

| address | words
| :--- | :--- |
| 880 Holmes Lane    | [Holmes,Lane]
| 671 Bristol Street | [Bristol,Street]
| 789 Madison Street | [Madison,Street]

**Example 4: Text Replacement with mode=sed**

This example shows replacing email domains using sed mode for text substitution. The extracted field is returned as string type.

```sql
source=accounts | rex field=email mode=sed "s/@.*/@company.com/" | fields email | head 2;
```
{% include copy.html %}

The command returns the following results.

| email
| :---
| amberduke@company.com
| hattiebond@company.com

**Example 5: Using offset_field**

> This example shows tracking the character positions where matches occur. Extracted fields are string type, and the offset_field is also string type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example shows how to track the character positions where matches occur. Extracted fields are of a string type, and the `offset_field` is also of a string type:
```

```sql
source=accounts | rex field=email "(?<username>[^@]+)@(?<domain>[^.]+)" offset_field=matchpos | fields email, username, domain, matchpos | head 2;
```
{% include copy.html %}

The command returns the following results.

| email | username | domain | matchpos
:--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| amberduke@pyrami.com. | amberduke  | pyrami | domain=10-15&username=0-8
| hattiebond@netagy.com | hattiebond | netagy | domain=11-16&username=0-9

### Limitations

**Named Capture Group Naming:**

- Group names must start with a letter and contain only letters and digits
- For detailed Java regex pattern syntax and usage, refer to the [official Java Pattern documentation](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/regex/Pattern.html)

**Pattern Requirements:**

- Pattern must contain at least one named capture group
- Regular capture groups ``(...)`` without names are not allowed

**Max Match Limit:**
 
- The ``max_match`` parameter is subject to a configurable system limit to prevent memory exhaustion
- When ``max_match=0`` (unlimited) is specified, it is automatically capped at the configured limit (default: 10)

> - User-specified values exceeding the configured limit result in an error

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- User-specified values exceeding the configured limit result in an error.
```

</details>

---

## sort

<details open markdown="block">
  <summary>
    Syntax and examples
  </summary>
  {: .text-delta }
  
Use the `sort` command to sort search results by a specified field.

### Syntax

```sql
sort [count] <[+|-] sort-field>...
```
{% include copy.html %}

The following table describes the parameters for the `sort` command.

Field | Description | Required | Default
:--- | :--- | :--- | :---
`count` | The maximum number results to return from the sorted result. If count=0, all results are returned. | No | 1000
`[+|-]` | Use plus [+] to sort by ascending order and minus [-] to sort by descending order. | No | Ascending order
`sort-field` | Specify the field that you want to sort by. | Yes | N/A

**Example 1: Sort by one field**

To sort all documents by the `age` field in ascending order, use the following command:

```sql
search source=accounts | sort age | fields account_number, age;
```
{% include copy.html %}

The command returns the following results.

account_number | age
:--- | :---
13 | 28
1 | 32
18 | 33
6 | 36

**Example 2: Sort by one field and return all results**

> To sort all documents by the `age` field in ascending order and specify count as 0 to get back all results, use the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To sort all documents by the `age` field in ascending order and specify `count` as 0 to return all results, use the following command:
```

```sql
search source=accounts | sort 0 age | fields account_number, age;
```
{% include copy.html %}

The command returns the following results.

account_number | age
:--- | :---
13 | 28
1 | 32
18 | 33
6 | 36

**Example 3: Sort by one field in descending order**

To sort all documents by the `age` field in descending order, use the following command:

```sql
search source=accounts | sort - age | fields account_number, age;
```
{% include copy.html %}

account_number | age
:--- | :---
6 | 36
18 | 33
1 | 32
13 | 28

**Example 4: Specify the number of sorted documents to return**

> To sort all documents by the `age` field in ascending order and specify count as 2 to get back two results, use the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To sort all documents by the `age` field in ascending order and specify `count` as 2 to return two results, use the following command:
```

```sql
search source=accounts | sort 2 age | fields account_number, age;
```
{% include copy.html %}

The command returns the following results.

account_number | age
:--- | :---
13 | 28
1 | 32

**Example 5: Sort by multiple fields**

> To sort all documents by the `gender` field in ascending order and `age` field in descending order, use the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To sort all documents by the `gender` field in ascending order and the `age` field in descending order, use the following command:
```

```sql
search source=accounts | sort + gender, - age | fields account_number, gender, age;
```
{% include copy.html %}

The command returns the following results.

| account_number | gender | age
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| 13 | F | 28
| 6  | M | 36
| 18 | M | 33
| 1  | M | 32

</details>

---

## spath

<details open markdown="block">
  <summary>
    Syntax and examples
  </summary>
  {: .text-delta }
  

> The spath command allows extracting fields from structured text data. It currently allows selecting from JSON data with JSON paths.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `spath` command allows you to extract fields from structured text data. It currently allows selecting from JSON data with JSON paths.
```

### Syntax

```sql
spath input=<field> [output=<field>] [path=]<path>
```
{% include copy.html %}

The following table describes the parameters for the `spath` command.

Field | Description | Required | Default
:--- | :--- | :--- | :---
`input` | The field to scan for JSON data. | Yes | N/A
`output` | The destination field that the data is loaded to. | No | Value of path
`path` | The path of the data to load for the object. | Yes | N/A

> **Example 1: Simple Field Extraction**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Example 1: Simple field extraction**
```

> The simplest spath is to extract a single field. This example extracts n from the doc field of type text.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The simplest `spath` is to extract a single field. The following example extracts n from the doc field of type text:
```

```sql
source=structured | spath input=doc_n n | fields doc_n n;
```
{% include copy.html %}

The command returns the following results.

doc_n | n
:--- | :---
{"n": 1} | 1
{"n": 2} | 2
{"n": 3} | 3

**Example 2: Lists & Nesting**

> This example demonstrates more JSON path uses, like traversing nested fields and extracting list elements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example demonstrates additional JSON path use cases, such as traversing nested fields and extracting list elements:
```

The following table lists the aggregation functions and also indicates how each one handles null or missing values:

Function | NULL | MISSING
:--- | :--- | :---
`COUNT` | Not counted | Not counted
`SUM` | Ignore | Ignore
`AVG` | Ignore | Ignore
`MAX` | Ignore | Ignore
`MIN` | Ignore | Ignore

### Syntax

```sql
stats <aggregation>... [by-clause]...
```
{% include copy.html %}

The following table describes the parameters for the `stats` command.

Field | Description | Required | Default
:--- | :--- | :--- | :---
`aggregation` | Specify a statistical aggregation function. The argument of this function must be a field. | Yes | N/A
`by-clause` | Specify one or more fields to group the results by. If not specified, the `stats` command returns only one row, which is the aggregation over the entire result set. | No | N/A

**Example 1: Calculate the average value of a field**

To calculate the average `age` of all documents, use the following command:

```sql
search source=accounts | stats avg(age);
```
{% include copy.html %}

The command returns the following results.

| avg(age)
:--- |
| 32.25

**Example 2: Calculate the average value of a field by group**

> To calculate the average age grouped by gender, use the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To calculate the average `age` grouped by gender, use the following command:
```

Field | Description | Required | Default
:--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
`timefield` | The field to use for time-based grouping. Must be a timestamp field. | No | `@timestamp`
`span` | Specifies the time interval for grouping data. | No | 1m
`limit` | Specifies the maximum number of distinct values to display when using the "by" clause. | No | 10
`useother` | Controls whether to create an "OTHER" category for values beyond the limit. | No | true
`aggregation_function` | The aggregation function to apply to each time bucket. | Yes | N/A
`by` | Groups the results by the specified field in addition to time intervals. If not specified, the aggregation is performed across all documents in each time interval. | No | N/A

**Example 1: Count events by hour**

This example counts events for each hour and groups them by host.

```sql
source=events | timechart span=1h count() by host;
```
{% include copy.html %}

The command returns the following results.

| @timestamp | host | count()
:--- | :--- | :--- |
| 2023-01-01 10:00:00 | server1 | 4
| 2023-01-01 10:00:00 | server2 | 4

**Example 2: Calculate average number of packets by minute** 

> This example calculates the average packets for each minute without grouping by any field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example calculates the average packets for each minute without grouping by any field:
```

| 2023-01-01 10:00:00 | active | 30.0
| 2023-01-01 10:05:00 | inactive | 30.0
| 2023-01-01 10:10:00 | pending | 60.0
| 2023-01-01 10:15:00 | processing | 60.0
| 2023-01-01 10:20:00 | cancelled | 180.0
| 2023-01-01 10:25:00 | completed | 60.0
| 2023-01-01 10:30:00 | inactive | 90.0
| 2023-01-01 10:35:00 | pending | 30.0

**Example 4: Using the limit parameter with count() function** 

When there are many distinct values in the "by" field, the timechart command displays the top values based on the limit parameter and groups the rest into an "OTHER" category.
This query displays the top 2 hosts with the highest count values, and groups the remaining hosts into an "OTHER" category.

```sql
source=events | timechart span=1m limit=2 count() by host;
```
{% include copy.html %}

| @timestamp | host | count()
:--- | :--- | :--- |
| 2023-01-01 10:00:00 | server1 | 1
| 2023-01-01 10:05:00 | server2 | 1
| 2023-01-01 10:10:00 | server1 | 1
| 2023-01-01 10:15:00 | server2 | 1
| 2023-01-01 10:20:00 | server1 | 1
| 2023-01-01 10:25:00 | server2 | 1
| 2023-01-01 10:30:00 | server1 | 1
| 2023-01-01 10:35:00 | server2 | 1

**Example 5: Using limit=0 with count() to show all values** 

> To display all distinct values without any limit, set limit=0 and use the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To display all distinct values without any limit, set `limit=0` and use the following command:
```

```sql
source=events_many_hosts | timechart span=1h limit=0 count() by host;
```
{% include copy.html %}

The command returns the following results.

| @timestamp | host | count()
:--- | :--- | :--- |
| 2024-07-01 00:00:00 | web-01 | 1
| 2024-07-01 00:00:00 | web-02 | 1
| 2024-07-01 00:00:00 | web-03 | 1
| 2024-07-01 00:00:00 | web-04 | 1
| 2024-07-01 00:00:00 | web-05 | 1
| 2024-07-01 00:00:00 | web-06 | 1
| 2024-07-01 00:00:00 | web-07 | 1
| 2024-07-01 00:00:00 | web-08 | 1
| 2024-07-01 00:00:00 | web-09 | 1
| 2024-07-01 00:00:00 | web-10 | 1
| 2024-07-01 00:00:00 | web-11 | 1

**Example 6: Using useother=false with count() function** 

> Limit to top 10 hosts without OTHER category (useother=false):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example displays the top 10 hosts without the OTHER category (`useother=false`):
```

```
{% include copy.html %}

The command returns the following results.

| @timestamp | host | count()
:--- | :--- | :--- |
| 2024-07-01 00:00:00 | web-01 | 1
| 2024-07-01 00:00:00 | web-02 | 1
| 2024-07-01 00:00:00 | web-03 | 1
| 2024-07-01 00:00:00 | web-04 | 1
| 2024-07-01 00:00:00 | web-05 | 1
| 2024-07-01 00:00:00 | web-06 | 1
| 2024-07-01 00:00:00 | web-07 | 1
| 2024-07-01 00:00:00 | web-08 | 1
| 2024-07-01 00:00:00 | web-09 | 1
| 2024-07-01 00:00:00 | web-10 | 1

**Example 7: Using limit with useother parameter and avg() function** 

Limit to top 3 hosts with OTHER category (default useother=true):

```sql
source=events_many_hosts | timechart span=1h limit=3 avg(cpu_usage) by host;
```
{% include copy.html %}

The command returns the following results.

| @timestamp | host | avg(cpu_usage)
:--- | :--- | :--- |
| 2024-07-01 00:00:00 | OTHER | 41.3
| 2024-07-01 00:00:00 | web-03 | 55.3
| 2024-07-01 00:00:00 | web-07 | 48.6
| 2024-07-01 00:00:00 | web-09 | 67.8

**Example 8: Handling null values in the "by" field** 

This example shows how null values in the "by" field are treated as a separate category. The dataset events_null has 1 entry that does not have a host field.

> It is put into a separate "NULL" category because the defaults for `usenull` and `nullstr` are `true` and `"NULL"` respectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is put into a separate "NULL" category because the defaults for `usenull` and `nullstr` are `true` and `"NULL"`, respectively:
```

```sql
source=events_null | timechart span=1h count() by host;
```
{% include copy.html %}

The command returns the following results.

| @timestamp | host | count()
:--- | :--- | :--- |
| 2024-07-01 00:00:00 | NULL | 1
| 2024-07-01 00:00:00 | db-01 | 1
| 2024-07-01 00:00:00 | web-01 | 2
| 2024-07-01 00:00:00 | web-02 | 2

**Example 9: Calculate packets per second rate** 

> This example calculates the per-second packet rate for network traffic data using the per_second() function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example calculates the per-second packet rate for network traffic data using the `per_second()` function:
```

```sql
source=events | timechart span=30m per_second(packets) by host;
```
{% include copy.html %}

The command returns the following results.

| @timestamp | host | per_second(packets)
:--- | :--- | :--- |
| 2024-07-01 00:00:00 | server1 | 0.1
| 2024-07-01 00:00:00 | server2 | 0.05
| 2024-07-01 00:00:00 | server1 | 0.1
| 2024-07-01 00:00:00 | server2 | 0.05

### Limitations

> - Only a single aggregation function is supported per timechart command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Only a single aggregation function is supported per `timechart` command.
```

The following table describes the parameters for the `top` command.

Field | Description | Required | Default
:--- | :--- | :--- | :---
`N` | Specify the number of results to return. | No | 10
`field-list` | Specify a comma-delimited list of field names. | Yes | N/A
`by-clause` | Specify one or more fields to group the results by. | No | N/A

**Example 1: Find the most common values in a field**

To find the most common genders, use the following command:

```sql
search source=accounts | top gender;
```
{% include copy.html %}

The command returns the following results.

| gender
:--- |
| M
| F

**Example 2: Find the most common value in a field**

To find the most common gender, use the following command:

```sql
search source=accounts | top 1 gender;
```
{% include copy.html %}

The command returns the following results.

| gender
:--- |
| M

**Example 3: Find the most common values grouped by gender**

To find the most common age grouped by gender, use the following command:

```sql
search source=accounts | top 1 age by gender;
```
{% include copy.html %}

The command returns the following results.

| gender | age
:--- | :--- |
| F  | 28
| M  | 32

### Limitations

> The `top` command is not rewritten to OpenSearch DSL, it is only executed on the coordinating node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `top` command is not rewritten to OpenSearch query DSL; it is only executed on the coordinating node.
```

</details>

---

## where

<details open markdown="block">
  <summary>
    Syntax and examples
  </summary>
  {: .text-delta }

> Use the `where` command with a boolean expression to filter the search result. The `where` command only returns the result when the boolean expression evaluates to true.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the `where` command with a Boolean expression to filter the search result. The `where` command only returns the result when the Boolean expression evaluates to `true`.
```
